---
title: Habitat alteration reduces functional redundancy in Neotropical bat and bird
  assemblages
author: "Anikó B. Tóth"
date: "16/08/2018"
output:
  bookdown::html_document2: default
  bookdown::word_document2: default
bibliography: References.bib
---


Abstract: Anthropogenic habitat destruction may be one of the greatest threats facing many species today. It is being increasingly recognised that conservation and monitoring efforts should target not just species but communities and ecosystems. Traditional techniques for measuring communities include estimating richness and beta diversity, but these methods are somewhat limited, because species must be extirpated or extinct before changes in these measures can be observed. An increasingly popular method that can be used to detect more subtle changes in community structure is co-occurrence analysis. We calculated richness and beta-diversity for Neotropical assemblages of birds and bats at altered and pristine sites. We followed this up by calculating co-occurrence scores for all possible pairs of species in each assemblage. Using comparative techniques, we investigated the role of a functional trait, diet, in the co-occurrence structure of these taxa and quantified how habitat alteration affected these patterns. 

##Main text: 

Landscape-scale habitat alteration by humans is one of the foremost threats facing species today.  XX percent of Earth’s habitable (non-frozen) land area has been altered by humans, and it has been estimated that this figure will climb to YY by the year 2050. The most widely documented result of habitat alteration is the local extirpation of species in affected areas, reducing local (alpha) diversity, spatial turnover (beta), or both. As a result, a common management goal is to prevent extinctions by protecting the habitat of a particular, typically large or charismatic, species. However, it is becoming increasingly clear that the focus of conservation, management, and monitoring efforts should not be just on individual species, but also on communities, ecosystems, and the biotic interactions that hold them together. Shifts in the composition, as opposed to the richness, of communities is also well-documented (@Dornelas2014, @McKinney2006) and has recently received increasing attention. The consequence of shifting site compositions in response to urbanisation is often a reduction in beta diversity, particularly when sensitive and specialist species are extirpated while adaptive generalists or human-culatived species become increasingly dominant (@McKinney1999, @McKinney2006, @Toth2014). 

But habitat disturbance can cause more nuanced rearrangements, which may be overlooked by traditional monitoring approaches. For instance, species may change which sites they occupy in response to a particular type of disturbance without reducing the overall richness on the landscape. Research shows that ecosystem change is often reflected in turnover of species over time rather than simple reductions in alpha diveristy (@Magurran2018). If multiple species respond to a disturbance differently, community assembly patterns may undergo shifts that are not detectable by examining the summary statistics of the assemblage. Magurran _et al._ (-@Magurran2016) stress that changes in composition, particularly when it results in biotic homogenisation, may eventually compromise ecosystem function. Documenting and examining such subtle changes in community assembly, particularly with respect to species functional characteristics, could help predict more dramatic changes in diversity and composition. Moreover, they can help us understand the effects of alteration on a finer level, before species are extirpated.  

One way to look more closely at shifting community assembly patterns is by calculating the co-occurrence patterns of all pairwise combinations of species. This approach has been used for decades (@Connor1979), and has recently been used to examine community assembly of species under human disturbance (@Lane2014, @Kay2017), changing climate conditions (@Araujo2007), and across environmental gradients (@BarMassada2017). The methods used for this approach can detect whether species are occurring together more often than expected (aggregation) or less often than expected (segregation) by chance. They can also assign a value, or weight, to represent how strongly the pattern is supported by the available data. The resulting associations can then be examined singly or as a whole, represented by a network data structure where the nodes are species and the links (edges) represent their co-occurrence patterns.

Previous studies have examined the functional diversity, beta diversity and nestedness of assemblages under changing habitat conditions. A few have used co-occurrence networks to detect changes in assemblages. Kay _et al._ (-@Kay2017) showed that lizard assemblages in Australian agricultural sites did not have significantly reduced richness compared to pristine sites. However, the ability of species to coexist with others decreased, evidenced by reduced network connectance. Moreover, they showed that the changes in network structure were not driven by universal shifts in all species pairs, but rather by a complex restructuring of associations that involved both increases and decreases in pair coexistence.

 It is still not known how this structural rearrangement plays out, nor what its consequences will be. One challenge is that much of what we know about network dynamics is derived from biological interaction networks such as plant-pollinator or trophic networks. It is not clear how the assumptions used in interaction networks change when similar analyses are applied to co-occurrence networks, which are statistically postulated relationships that do not necessarily imply a biotic interaction, though recent attempts have taken steps to clarify the relationship between co-occurrences and interactions (@Cazelles2016). Furthermore, associations calculated with co-occurrence do not have an objective biological interpretation. While they provide a summary of the spatial relationship between two species, they do not distinguish what factors are responsible for the observed co-occurrence pattern or why. In fact, most associations are likely driven by a combination of factors (e.g. shared habitat preferences, direct and indirect biotic interaction, or mutual dispersal barriers), and distinguishing between these is one of the current challenges associated with this approach (@Blois2014).  
 
In this paper, we begin by examining the alpha richness and beta diversity of communities of neotropical birds and bats under altered vs. pristine conditions. We then calculate co-occurrence scores to look at changes in community structure of these taxa under habitat alteration, using pristine sites as a control. We extened the investigation by examining the effect of habitat alteration on functional properties of each assemblage. We separate the species into major diet categories, and we ask whether co-occurrence patterns are different for pairs that share a diet and those that do not. Then, we look at the co-occurrence patterns of each individual diet group for pairs that are in the same diet group. The first experiment addresses whether being in the same dietary guild influences your ability to co-occur. If species in the same guild are more aggregated in comparison to pairs in different diet guilds, it means they are partitioning resources or able to coexist in competition. If they are more segregated, this means they may be excluding one another. The second experiment addresses whether there is a difference in the response of the dietary guilds to habitat alteration. For instance, does habitat alteration cause one guild to aggregate more (evidence of local resource partitioning or coexistence in competition) or segregate more (evidence of exclusion) than other guilds? 

We report marked changes in the co-occurrence of dietary groups that is indifferent to changes in alpha and beta diversity. 

#### Materials and Methods
Abundance data were dowloaded from the ecological register for mist netted bats and birds in the neotropics. We also dowloaded register metadata for the species and sites in the abundance tables, including coordinates and climate data for sites and major diet guild for species. 

*__Richness and Beta diversity.__* We estimated richness for bats and birds in altered and pristine sites using the squares diversity extrapolator (@Alroy2018), using abundance data for all sites. We also calculated the beta diversity between all pairs of sites, then plotted the distributions of values, separating them into groups by each pair's habitat: altered-altered, pristine-pristine, and pristine-altered. We used the modified Forbes similarity index (@Alroy2015)) as the similarity measure for beta diversity. Finally, we ran a principal components analysis (PCA) on the sites to check for compositional shifts between altered and pristine habitats, and did a permutation test to check for significant changes in composition due to habitat alteration.

*__Co-occurrence analysis__* The abundance data were converted to presence-absence format. Sites with fewer than four species were removed from the analysis to allow enough local richness to examine community assembly. Species with a single occurrence were also removed, as co-occurrences calculated from too few observations are unreliable (@Veech2013). We separated the remaining sites into altered and pristine sites. The split was based on the altered.habitat field in the site metadata table, which is empty if the site is pristine and filled with the type of land use if the site is altered. Altered sites were comprised of cropland, disturbed forest, fragment, pasture, plantation, rural, secondary forest, suburban, and urban categories. See the documentation of the Ecological Register for the definitions of these altered habitat types. To minimise the effects of biogeography on our results, we finished by removing any sites in either category that were in an area not covered by the other type of site (see supplement). Finally, we selected species that were found in both altered and pristine habitats, to measure differences that are not caused by local extirpation or turnover between pristine and altered sites. The final dataset was comprised of 71 bat and 109 bird species in 46 and 27 pristine and 48 and 22 altered sites, respectively. 

We calculated the co-occurrence of every pairwise combination of species using the mid-P variant of Fisher's Exact Test (@Kallio2011). Co-occurrence metrics are influenced by the number of sites used to calculate them, so in comparative analyses co-occurrence scores must be calculated from a fixed number of sites. Because we compared altered and pristine sites in two taxa, we calculated pairwise co-occurrences from 100 subsamples of sites for each taxon in altered and pristine sites.

*__Functional Analysis.__* Strategic splitting and comparison of co-occurrence data can yield information about the differences in the subsets of the data. We split our co-occurrence results in two ways. First, we separated pairs that rely on the same food types (primary and secondary sources of food both had to match, but could be in opposite order), some of the same food types (sharing one diet source), and those pairs that rely on different food types (no matching food sources), and plotted the effect of alteration on the proportion and magnitude of their aggregations and segregations. Second, we examined changes in co-occurrence patterns within the individual diet categories (i.e. pairs where both species were in the same diet category). Bats were separated into insectivores, frugivores, nectarivores, carnivores (including piscivores) and sanguinivores, and several also fell into one of two combined categories: frugivore-nectarivores and nectarivore-insectivores. The largest category was frugivores, followed by insectivores and carnivores, with the remaining categories containing only a few species. Birds were separated into frugivores, insectivores, granivores, and nectarivores, with combined categories frugivore-insectivore, frugivore-granivore, and nectarivore-insectivore. The largest categories were pure insectivores and frugivore-insectivores, with the other categories having fewer than ten species each.

When analysing associations, it is helpful to picture them as falling along a gradient between segregated and aggregated pairs, with random or weakly associated pairs in the middle. Segregated pairs receive negative weights and are located on the left while aggregated pairs receive positive weights, and are located on the right. In this framework, a net change in co-occurrence can cause one of four main patterns: (a) Right-shift, which is an increase in aggregations and/or decrease in segregations; (b) a left-shift, or increase in segregation and/or decrease in aggregation; (c) Increase in the strength of both aggregations and segregations; and (d) Decrease in the strength of all associations. The net change associated with the full assemblages and within-guild assemblages can suggest biological mechanisms for the shifts in co-occurrence. For instance, a shift toward segregations in pairs that share a diet category compared to those that do not may mean that competitive exclusion has increased, while a shift toward aggregations means that particular altered sites can support the coexistence of more species in the same dietary group. Stronger associations indicate that species are forming Clementsian clusters, likely due to spatial structure in food resources introduced by habitat alteration (e.g. pastures provide and abundance of one type of food and plantations provide another type). Weaker associations indicate that spatial structure of the food resource is less defined in altered habitats, and species are dispersing more randomly or becoming very widespread.

The first analysis explores whether habitat alteration changes the co-occurrence of species that compete for food, using non-competing pairs as a control. A left-shift indicates an increase in exclusion, while a right-shift indicates an increase in coexistence, likely due to an abundance of food resources. Stronger associations may indicate that a combination of the above two processes is causing compartmentalisation of the community, while weakening associations indicate that food resources have less impact on community structure in altered habitats. 

For our second split of the data we focused on the pairs that shared diet sources. We split these by diet category and plotted the effect of alteration on the proportion and magnitude of aggregations and segregations. This analysis explores the differences in the responses of pairs in different diet categories. If the responses of pairs in each diet category differ, this may indicate that differences in the spatial availability of various food resources under habitat alteration are causing changes in community structure.

#### Results 

*__Richness and Beta Diversity.__* After employing a richness estimator, altered sites had unchanged alpha richness compared to pristine sites. Average richness for bat samples in pristine habitats was 17.86, and 18.53 in altered habitats. Average richness for bird samples in pristine habitats was 50.96 and 53.05 in altered habitats. For both bats and birds, 58% of species found in both pristine and altered habitats increased their occupancies in altered habitats. Overall, however, 58% of bat and 62% of bird species decreased their occupancies in altered habitats, often disappearing altogether.

Altered sites had the lowest beta-diversity for both taxa, decreasing by 8% for bats and 3% for birds from pristine sites. The analysis also revealed relatively high turnover between altered and pristine sites, indicating that altered sites tend to have their own suite of species, different from the composition in pristine habitats. This is supported by the PCA, which indicates that altered sites are significantly different from pristine sites *[how to interpret the PCA?]. [The first two axes are explained by latitude and whether or not the site is in the amazon basin-- although most of the amazon sites are also pristine for obvious reasons...]*

*__Co-occurrence analysis.__* Overall, the co-occurrence of bats and birds responded to habitat alteration in opposite ways. On average, bats exhibited fewer aggregations and birds exhibited more aggregations in altered habitats (Fig. 4). However, the remaining aggregations in bats became stronger and segregations became weaker on average, while segregations became stronger in birds (and aggregation strength was unchanged) (Fig. 5). Our subsequent functional analysis sheds more light on these results.

*__Functional analysis.__* Bats exhibit an increasing incidence of segregations in altered habitats, but this pattern becomes stronger when the species in a pair share at least one food source (Fig. 6). In addition, the magnitude of associations shows a right-shift (stronger aggregations and weaker segregations) in pairs that do not share food sources and a left-shift in pairs that share one or two food sources (Fig. 7). Thus, bats show stronger and more frequent segregations in altered habitats when they are competing for food, and this is obscured in the overall pattern by pairs that do not compete for food, which is the largest category.

Birds show an increase in the incidence of aggregations in altered habitats, but this pattern becomes weaker when the species in a pair share at least one food source (Fig. 6). This amounts to a left-shift with respect to the control, but implies that habitat alteration encourages aggregation for another reason. Birds also exhibit an increase in the strength of segregations in all categories, irrespective of shared food sources (Fig. 8). In other words, birds show stronger segregations in altered habitats, but this may not be related to the degree of competition for food. Altered habitats cause weakened aggregations in pairs that do not compete for food and strengthened aggregations for species that share at least one food source. Thus, sharing food sources seems to affect aggregations, but not segregations in bird pairs in altered sites. The increase in the strength of both aggregations and segregations for competing birds amounts to Clementsian compartmentalisation of the community in altered sites. Although the sites are biogeographically clustered, this is true of both altered and pristine habitat types due to our correction for biogeography, and thus cannot explain the difference between the two site categories. 

Our within-guild analysis shows co-occurrence scores that shifted away from aggregations and toward stronger and/or more frequent segregations (left-shift) in most feeding guilds for both taxa. Bat guilds exhibited increased incidence of segregations in four out of seven guilds (Fig. 9), with pure nectarivores (3 species) increasing aggregations, and frugivores (36 species) and sanguinivores (2 species) exhibiting no change. All bat guilds except insectivores (16 species) and sanguinivores shifted toward stronger segregations and/or weaker aggregations in altered habitats (Fig. 10). These two guilds both exhibited a strong increase in aggregation strength in altered habitats. 

All bird guilds except granivores exhibited stronger segregations in altered habitats, and frugivores, frugivore-granivores, and nectarivore-invertivores (containing four, six, and eight species, respectively) had weaker aggregations as well (Fig. 11). Granivores (3 species) exhibited a strong right-shift in both incidence and strength of aggregations [**this may be a sampling issue**]. See the supplement for partial and no diet match pairs separated by category. 

####Discussion

In this study we tested effect of habitat alteration on community assembly. There were no substantial changs in alpha richness under habitat alteration. We showed changes in composition from pristine to altered habitats, as well as decreases in beta diversity in the presence of alteration, supporting the results of Kay _et al._ (-@Kay2017) for lizards in Australia. This paper therefore joins the long parade of preceding studies showing that habitat alteration causes homogenisation rather than reduced richness (@Toth2014, @Dornelas2014, @McKinney2006, @McKinney1999, @Trentanovi2013, @Knop2015). This is typically driven by the expansion of several cosmopolitan species while rare and specialist species are extirpated (@Mckinney1999, @Toth2014). 

Changes in co-occurrence were complex, but summed to a net shift toward segregations in altered habitats, particularly for bats. This result echoes similar results for human disturbances on much longer timescales for mammals (@Lyons2016, @Smith2016) and fossil pollen (@Lyons2016, @Blois2014) and also agrees with the loss of positive connectance observed for modern lizards (@Kay2017) and birds (@Lane2014) under habitat disturbance. Previous studies have attributed the loss of positive connectance to human impacts, but the mechanism by which this occurs has thus far been elusive. 

Our analysis of associations within habitat guilds lends additonal insights to the results and hints at an explanation. Bats in particular exhibited more frequent segregations in altered habitats, and this was much more evident in competing pairs, suggesting an increase in the incidence of competitive exclusion. Thus, altered sites apparently cannot support functionally redundant species to the extent that pristine sites can. Interestingly, in pristine habitats, competing bat pairs aggregate significantly more strongly than non-competing pairs (Fig. 7), suggesting that far from excluding one another, competing species of bats are able to coexist easily in the wild. Though birds exhibited stronger segregations in altered habitats, this does not seem to be related to food competition. It is possible that competition in birds is more intensive for another resource, such as roosting/nesting sites or foraging/activity time. Indeed, bats often fly long distances from roosting sites to forage (citation) and partition foraging times (citation). This may explain why food seems to be the limiting resource for bats but not for birds. In pristine sites, birds apparently have a different community structure than bats, because they tend to aggregate less and segregate more when they compete for food. This suggests that competitive exclusion is usually far more common in birds than bats, and habitat alteration seems to be reversing this pattern. 

Bat insectivore pairs exhibited a marked increase in aggregation strength at altered habitats, opposite to almost every other guild. One potential mechanism for this phenomenon could be partial extirpations as a response to the the graded severity of habitat alteration in our altered sites, which range from forest fragments to rural, suburban, and finally urban habitats. A well-known consequence of partial extirpations is the emergence of a nested pattern, wherein the most common species occur in most sites, while increasingly sensitive species are extirpated from the most degraded sites or smallest patches (@Patterson1987). The result is a community structure where the species in the most depauperate faunas are proper subsets of the richer faunas. This has been well-documented in island archipelagoes (@Patterson1987) and a variety of habitats and taxa (@Wright1998). Because of the emergence of proper subsets, such a pattern would cause stronger aggregations and weaker segregations, as is observed with bat insectivores. Moreover, this is probably the mechanism in play for species that do not share a dietary source, as they exhibit the same right-shift (Fig. 4), and may even represent the backdrop of community structural change on which the results of competition and exclusion play out. 

It is easy to see how heightened competition and more frequent exclusion between species with similar diets ultimately results in the loss of functional diversity at altered sites, potentially compromising community functional redundancy. This as well as the increasing modularity of assemblages have the potential to adversely affect community resilience (@Thebault2010, @Heleno2011, @Fournier2016, @Coux2016, @Gao2016). 

####__Need conclusion__

###Figures



#####*Figure 1.* Richness distribution of altered and pristine sites for bats and birds.




#####*Figure 2.* Beta diversity distributions of altered and pristine sites for bats and birds using the Forbes Similarity index. Pairs of sites are grouped by altered-altered (red), pristine-pristine (blue), and pristine-altered (green) pairs. The lower the value, the higher the beta-diversity of the site pair. 





#####*Figure 3.* PCA of altered and pristine sites for bats and birds. There is a significant difference between the composition of altered and pristine sites *[in both taxa????]* p < 0.05 for birds. 



#####*Figure 4.* Percent aggregated pairs for bats and birds in altered and pristine sites. 



#####*Figure 5.* Mean magnitude of aggregations and segregations in altered and pristine habitats for bats and birds. Altered sites are shown in gray while pristine sites are green. 



#####*Figure 6.* Percent aggregated pairs in altered and pristine habitats for bats and birds, separated by the degree of shared dietary sources in the pair.



#####*Figure 7.* Mean magnitude of aggregations and segregations in bats, with pairs grouped by degree of shared dietary sources in the pair. 




#####*Figure 8.* Mean magnitude of aggregations and segregations in birds, with pairs grouped by degree of shared dietary sources in the pair. 




#####*Figure 9.*Percent aggregated pairs in altered and pristine habitats for pairs of bats and birds that fully share dietary sources, grouped into diet categories. Key: CI = carnivore; F = frugivore; FG = mixed frugive granivore; FI = mixed frugivore insectivore; G = granivore; I = insectivore; N = nectarivore; NF = mixed nectarivore frugivore; NI = mixed nectarivore insectivore; and S = sanguinivore.  




#####*Figure 10.* Mean magnitude of aggregations and segregations in pairs of bats that fully share dietary soures, grouped into diet categories. Key: CI = carnivore; F = frugivore; I = insectivore; N = nectarivore; NF = mixed necativore fruivore; NI = mixed nectarivore insectivore; and S = sanguinivore.  





#####*Figure 11.* Mean magnitude of aggregations and segregations in pairs of birds that fully share dietary soures, grouped into diet categories.Key: F = frugivore; FG = mixed frugive granivore; FI = mixed frugivore insectivore; G = granivore; I = insectivore; N = nectarivore; and NI = mixed nectarivore insectivore.  

